Silvan Zingg (born 19 March 1973) is a Swiss boogie woogie, blues and Jazz pianist and founder in 2002 of the International Boogie Woogie festival in Lugano, Switzerland.[1]Silvan Zingg is called the "Boogie Woogie Ambassador"[citation needed]. He was born in Lugano to a musical family. Before he started school, he had learned to play the piano and was particularly inspired by the work of Afro-American blues pianists. After studies as a graphic designer he decided to become a professional musician. Zingg has since performed in more than 1,000 concerts in 30 countries: Switzerland, Germany, Liechtenstein, Austria, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, Spain, Luxembourg, Greece, Monaco, Andorra, the Vatican, Bulgaria, Poland, Czech Republic, Hungary, Sweden, England, Ireland, the USA, Canada, India, Arab Emirates, China, Russia, Mexico. He gave his first overseas solo concert at 18 years of age. He was the youngest pianist and only European at the Masters Of Blues & Boogie Woogie Piano Night in Charleston, South Carolina together with Jimmy Walker, Skeeter Brandon. He has performed in other American venues including the Cincinnati, Detroit, Newport Festivals. In November 2005 he performed with Chuck Berry in a sold out concert in Zurich. Silvan Zingg has played with such other Blues artists as Ray Charles, Memphis Slim, Sammy Price, Champion Jack Dupree, Katie Webster, Michel Petrucciani and Jimmy Walker. In 2011 Silvan Zingg was invited by festival promoter Claude Nobs to perform with B.B.King at the Montreux Jazz Festival. Among other on stage: Carlos Santana, John McLaughlin, Susan Tedeschi, Derek Trucks, Shemekia Copeland, Robert Randolph.His CD Boogie Woogie Triology won several awards, and was top selling CD on CDBaby for more than one year.[citation needed].In 2002, Zingg initiated the International Boogie Woogie Festival in Lugano. Since then it has been held annually in April and has attracted such entertainers as Little Willie Littlefield, Kenny "Blues Boss" Wayne, Carl Sonny Leyland, Mitch Woods, Axel Zwingenberger, Vince Weber, Joja Wendt, Jean Paul Amouroux, Michael Pewny and Chris Conz. In 2006, BBC World reported on the festival, which brought it world-wide attention. In November 2008, Silvan Zingg completed his first concert tour of China.In 2010, Zingg was invited to give a concert/lecture about the history of boogie woogie at the University of Texas in Brownsville.