As I was reading Linkedin articles I was ecstatic to find Scott MacIntosh's article about JC Penney. Like Mr. MacIntosh, I think we can learn a lot about business from studying JCP

In fact, with a group of three others, I spent most of my last semester analyzing the company. Our goal was to develop a buyout plan, from the perspective of a private equity group, and present it to a fake JCP board, consisting of fellow students, in order to purchase the company.

What we found

The JCP narrative is that Ron Johnson singlehandedly destroyed the company. To some extent that is true. Johnson botched the Martha Stewart deal. He refused to live in Plano. Instead, he opted to fly in from Palo Alto every week. He didn't communicate well within the company. He underestimated how hard it was to change the brand of a century-old company. Young people never believed JCP was a high-quality retailer. JCP's core demographic of 35-55 year-old women was repelled when the company moved to "every day low pricing." That being said the collapse of JCP can't be put on one man.

Before Johnson took over, the company had been stagnant for two decades. After moving to Plano from Manhattan, the company became increasingly aloof. It stuffed its board with members from old Texas industries. One prominent board member involved in change management was from RCA. Perhaps he was teaching the company how not to change.

The company had once been the leader in low-cost merchandising, but its position got squeezed by Wal-Mart and Target. Ultimately, it ended up in no man's land. Not cheap enough for bargain shoppers and too low-quality for quality-conscious consumers. The relationship between Johnson and JCP was complicated from the very beginning. Activist investor, Bill Ackman, bought a large share of the struggling company hoping to turn it around by changing the culture. He hired Johnson to help, but neither of them had a chance of succeeding.

The company's former CEO Mike Ullman stayed involved and continued to have a strong pull with the company's board. Ackman resented Ullman's relationship with the board. Their relationship got so bad, Ackman eventually pulled his money out. He didn't leave quietly. On his way out the door, he accused Ullman of stuffing the board and creating a closed off culture.

What we learned

Our group learned three things from the project

1. Change incrementally so you don't have to change abruptly

Johnson and Ackman were forced to make sweeping changes because the company had been complacent for a long time. If the company had tweaked its strategy in the last two decades such changes wouldn't have been necessary.

As MBAs we talked a lot about the innovation vs. incremental improvements dichotomy. After studying company's like JCP and the research on the long-term effects of practices like Six-Sixma, I believe any company focused on incremental improvements misses the big picture. In the grand scheme of things, the only thing that matters is if you fit a consumer need. Companies need to think first about how they fit into the marketplace before they focus on efficiency.

2. If change isn't happening ask why

Modern research on risk-aversion blows me away. We tend to think managers are prudent when they are risk-averse, but in fact there is an element of selfishness to risk-aversion.

Let's say you are a CEO of a company and you have two options. In one option, you can try a new idea which results in a 50 percent chance of a 40 percent increase and a 50 percent chance of losing 20 percent now. On the other hand, you can do nothing and the company makes its quarterly numbers, but falls behinds its competitors. If you fall behind you don't lose anything this quarter, but in two years your company is trounced because you failed to act. In scenario one, you risk losing those nice CEO checks. In scenario two, you get to cash those checks for two more years. What's more, it's much easier to blame someone else for your mistake when the feedback isn't immediate. Some risk averse CEOs are extracting money from their companies.

3. Incentives matter a lot

When we started this project we thought the hardest thing to do was to come up with an idea to turn JCP around. Oh how wrong we were! From our perspective as private equity investors, we felt really good about filing for bankruptcy, reducing inventory by getting rid of stores and reducing store size. We found a great technology that made it possible to get clothes' measurements at home using 3D cameras like the XBOX one. We even found a way to market to our old demographic. We would sell our ability to deliver great fitting clothes directly to the home, so mothers wouldn't be overwhelmed during the back to school season. If we couldn't out cheap Wal-Mart, we could out convenience them.

Alas, the hardest part was what would we tell the board and Mike Ullman who continued to profit as the company circled the drain. Ultimately, the real problem at JCP is there is no incentive for an underperforming and entrenched board to replace themselves. For the company to benefit, they have to lose. At the beginning of the project last September, I thought it was a no doubter that JCP would be sold to a private equity firm. Nearly a year later, it still hasn't been sold. I think it's very possible no one wants to touch that culture.
